Welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Keith Youngblood is still a young man, but as you are about to hear, he packed an incredible story of service into the 20 years between 1987 and 2007.
Service that began with one of several tours of Germany, serving five months at Operation Desert Storm and then back to Iraq for Operation Intrinsic Action.
There was his two-year stint, served partially in President Clinton's communications detail,
three years here at A&M as a military advisor, and then back for 13 months to Iraq as a military marksman and part of a roving sniper unit, among other duties.
And I have not even mentioned the time that he and seven others were stranded on a snow-covered mountaintop in Macedonia.
His story of service is truly remarkable, and we welcome Sergeant Keith Youngblood to Veterans of the Valley.
Keith, it is an honor to have you here.
You grew up in Avinger, Texas.
People who don't know where that is, it's a very little town between Texarkana and Longview, right?
Correct.
It's a little bitty town.
Well, at the time when I was there, I had a population of 671 people, and we had a graduating class of 11 in 1987.
Right.
How many stoplights?
There's no stoplights in that town.
We got a couple of stop signs, but no stoplights.
You still got a lot of family there, though, too, right?
Most of my family still lives there and all around that area.
Joined the Army right out of high school.
Talk about that because your dad was a Vietnam veteran.
Your granddad served in World War II, so it was pretty much in your blood, right?
It was tradition.
Most of the male members of our family, after we graduate, we go on to serve our country in one way or the other.
I joined straight out of high school.
couldn't think of anything better to do.
That was what was ingrained in my blood.
Went to Fort Benning for basic and you became infantryman first 18 months at Fort Riley in Kansas.
First of more than one tour at Germany.
Talk about your first tour of Germany in the 2nd Armored Division.
I was in 2nd Armored Division from 1989 to 1992.
I was there when the Berlin Wall initially came down.
We had
I'm trying to think what they're called.
All the people coming from East Berlin, we set up base camps for them.
And it was just a great time helping out all those people.
And then shortly thereafter, Iraq invaded Kuwait.
And in January of 1991, we deployed to Desert Storm, where I spent five months as an infantry sniper and also worked as the driver for our brigade commander.
So that very famous night that we all remember when Desert Storm broke out, that we all remember here stateside watching it on the news, the invasion.
Where were you that day, that night?
The night that that all happened, I was sitting on the berm one kilometer away from the Iraqi border.
We were sitting there doing, I was attached over to a field artillery attachment and we were doing a prep fire, getting the eight hour prep fire for getting ready for the invasion.
Right.
You were there until May, redeployed to Germany.
Lucius D. Clay Concern, talk about what your involvement was in sort of the historical part of that.
Lucius D. Clay Concern, shortly after we returned from Iraq, we found out that the newest concern in Germany was getting closed down.
We all were, we went through all the process of closing it down.
And then on May the 14th, the day of my son's birthday, was the day that they closed the concern down.
Right.
And I was the last person to walk through the gates as an American citizen on that post.
Part of history there.
Let's move on to 1992.
You were stationed at Fort McPherson.
Right.
Being stationed out of Fort McPherson, you went to Iraq several times as part of Operation Intrinsic Action.
This was a peacekeeping mission.
Talk a little bit about more what involved there.
My primary mission during that was as a logistics manager.
By this time, I'd already been transferred over to logistics from being injured during Iraq the first time.
And they told me that I had two choices.
I could either get out of the Army or I could change over to a new job.
So I became a logistics person.
And my job over there was ensuring that all the equipment that was coming in or out of the country was signed for specifically, and it was already had prepackaged packages set up for individual units that were coming in during that peacekeeping mission.
Right, right.
Want to move on.
1992 to 1994, you were, like you said, in the logistics manager for the Third Army.
Second tour of Germany from 1994 to 98, but in the middle of that in 1996, you were sent to Macedonia.
Talk about what your mission was there and then we're gonna get to what we referred to earlier about being stranded on the mountain top.
Our mission there was peacekeeping once again.
My job was as a logistics manager and Humvee operator.
Everybody knows what a Humvee is now from watching them on CNN.
But my job was to
our job there as a whole was peacekeeping on the border between um serbia and and macedonia and up in the mountains right right to just to monitor the border we've monitored the border for we had um we were there for six months and this was just to keep the stability of the region right correct that was that was your job
but something happened there it turned out to be one of the scariest moments of your 20 years of service actually let's talk about when you were stranded on the mountaintop because of the weather well it is in march and the weather and if anybody doesn't know about the weather in central europe it gets relatively cool in the winter we were stranded on a mountain at 18 000 foot we were there where we're supposed to be there for
a month at a time and well our month rolled around and well weather moved in helicopters couldn't come get us the convoys couldn't come get us so we were stranded there and the weather had gotten so bad and in fact that our radio communications weren't getting out as far as our people were right so we sat there and we
We didn't sit down and we decided, well, we're, we're pretty sure that we're stuck up here through the winter.
So we did what a little bit of hunting or whatever we could for, for food.
Cause you were down, you were, you were down to one day of food.
We were down to one day of food and that was canned goods.
And there were eight of you.
And there were eight people on the, on there.
And we're sitting there one day and, um,
Prayers were answered.
We hear these noises coming from the side of the mountain over where the road usually is.
And we look down there and we see these Finnish soldiers coming up the mountain.
And we see American and Finnish soldiers, American and Finnish flags on their vehicles.
And we're like, what are they doing here?
And we were like, well, it doesn't matter what they're doing here.
They're here.
And they were a godsend.
We didn't...
They were the only people that had gotten our radio messages that we were out of food and we were out of fuel, and they came to our rescue.
And they couldn't communicate back to you, so you didn't know that they were there.
Because you all were fixing to start digging out yourself.
Right.
It would have been about a 185-mile trek, right?
It would have been about 185 miles from the top of an 18,000-foot mountain.
Right.
So...
Here comes this finished company and they've got food for you.
So they pretty much saved you.
They saved our lives.
We were going to try to walk out.
Otherwise you had about five shovels between you.
It would have been quite a deal.
Your last month in Macedonia, traveled over the Balkans for a couple of weeks.
Back to Germany again in 97 and 98 for pretty much a normal deployment.
And now you're next to, the thing about the Army, you move around all the time.
You have no idea where you're going to be sent next.
Talk about January 99.
You were stationed in Arizona, but your actual operation was in Washington, D.C.
a lot of the time.
Yeah, I was working there and I was at Fort Huachuca, Arizona.
And then out of the blue one day, I get told, hey, Sergeant Youngblood, guess what?
You're heading to Washington, D.C.
for a month.
And I'm like, what's in Washington, D.C.
that I could be doing?
They're like, well, you've just been detailed to the presidential communications detail.
you're gonna be in charge of all the equipment for when the president moves anywhere.
So I get the chance to visit the White House.
I get a chance to fly around, not on Air Force One, but I got a tour of Air Force One
and got to fly around on all the presidential details when some of the missions that he flew on into different locations where he went.
Right.
It's quite a bit different from the deployments that you were used to, the foreign deployments.
This was more of a little bit fancier type of deal, like tagging along with the president.
This was a lot fancier.
This was suit and tie instead of uniform anymore.
So it was a great change.
It was a great experience.
So you rotated to Washington a lot from Arizona for this communication detail.
And I guess from that standpoint, I wouldn't say you got to know President Clinton well, but you visited with him some, I suppose, right?
I did.
I met President Clinton on several occasions.
I got to know his security detail very well.
Exactly.
Because if you didn't become friends with them, you didn't get to visit with the president.
Right.
2001, of all places, you're transferred to College Station, to Texas A&M.
Talk about what your duty was here at A&M as sort of an adjutant to the Corps, right?
Correct.
I was a military advisor for Company L1.
And then I was also the supply sergeant for the Army ROTC detachment.
I ensured that at the time, I believe there were 570 Army cadets and ensured that they had their uniforms.
And when we went to the field, I made sure that I got all their food and water and ammunition and just basically was a friend to the Corps.
And that wasn't a bad gig because you'd been an Aggie fan, right?
I've been an Aggie fan all my life.
Right.
So this was a good place to be for you.
So you didn't mind that deployment at all.
But it didn't go on forever, as nothing does in the Army.
So you were here for about three years, is that right?
I was here for about three and a half years.
Three and a half years.
December of 2004, back to Fort Hood.
Talked about what your training was there.
Obviously, it was training to go to Iraq.
I got back to Fort Hood in December of 2005 and when I got there the first, I'm sorry, it was December 2004, I got there and the first thing that I find out is that I'm going to a unit that doesn't exist.
Yeah, talk about that.
And they tell me that you're going to 2nd of the 77th Field Artillery Regiment.
And so I went on the website for Fort Hood and looked around and I
There's nothing there about them.
I'm like, what the heck is going on here?
So I talked to them.
I called over to this ghost unit.
They gave me a phone number and I talked to this captain and he goes, you're Sergeant Youngblood?
I was like, yeah.
He goes, why aren't you here yet?
He goes, you're going to be the first sergeant for my company.
I was like, okay, I've never heard of the unit.
I've been around Fort Hood all my time when I was at Texas A&M.
I've never met anybody from this unit.
He goes, oh, we're just starting up.
He goes, when you get here tomorrow, you're going to be the third person in the unit.
And I was like, what are we being stood up for?
He goes, well, we're going to be the artillery corps.
In one year, we're deploying to Iraq and we're going to be the sole artillery for the International Green Zone.
I was like, okay.
Essentially what we're talking about is you're teaching kids how to fight the war, how to stay alive, how to avoid IEDs, how to drive in Iraq.
And these are raw recruits that you're teaching.
We had raw recruits out of the...
The first 176 people that we had come into the unit were straight out of basic training in AIT.
They were artillerymen, we had infantrymen, cavalry scouts, supply, all kinds of just anything that you could think of as far as a unit.
We had those, and they were all brand new kids with no leadership.
So we had to...
We had our time on our hands teaching these kids.
Yeah, less than a year later, November 2005, you leave for Iraq for a 13-month tour one year after this unit was brought into existence, less than a year.
Less than a year.
After the unit was brought into existence.
Talk about your duty there.
You were supposed to be a battalion logistics officer, but they found out that you were a pretty good shot.
So that was changed, and you were given a job actually at the U.S.
Embassy in Baghdad.
Yeah, I was told about a month into the deployment, we were out just shooting, and we were training Iraqi soldiers, and they found out that I was a pretty decent shot.
So someone went back and researched my military records and found out that I'd been through sniper school years earlier.
And so as soon as they found out that they had a sniper in the green zone,
they moved me immediately from my normal job as a logistics officer to being the sniper for the U.S.
Embassy.
We had a platoon of snipers and they made me the first sergeant of it.
Right.
So you were hanging out on the rooftop of the embassy?
Spent 24 hours a day, six days a week up there.
We got one day off to shower and
Looking for the bad guys, looking for the people coming in with car bombs.
Looking for anybody coming in with car bombs.
Looking for people coming in with car bombs.
And that was your job.
But again, like most jobs, that didn't last.
And you were moved to what I would suppose as you regard as probably the most dangerous job that you had, certainly, as part of this roving sniper group.
Talk a little bit about that and sort of some of the intensive events that that involved.
Well, I was told, I guess it was in April, late April, early May, that we were pulling off the rooftops and we were going to start going out and setting up what they called flash TCPs, just traffic control points.
And our job was going to be just to check every vehicle that came through there
And we set up zones where if a person was within a certain amount of one zone, we flashed them with a flashlight and said, you can't come any further than this.
And if they kept coming, then as it got closer, then we would use deadly force.
Well, one day we were sitting there and an IED or a vehicle came along and he was barreling towards us and we had no way of stopping him.
Finally,
Charlie One, he was, I can't give you his real name, but he, Charlie One was my, one of our snipers.
He had to take a shot and when he did he hit the ordinance that was in the back of the vehicle and 25 yards from us this 500 pound IED explodes right there in our lap.
Wow.
That was quite an interesting day.
Luckily, nobody was hurt.
None of our guys were hurt.
I bet there were a lot of days like that.
I want to move on because we need to get to an important part.
But I want to look at some pictures.
This would be a good time to do that.
Some photographs that you've supplied from your time in Iraq.
So let's go ahead and go with them.
And here's the first one.
You and a couple of buddies there.
Where was that taken?
That was taken at the Australian compound.
That's under my right arm.
That's my best friend in this world.
That's Dwan Miller.
And the guy beside him became a very close friend of mine.
He was one of our snipers.
That's Colin Rogan.
He's an Australian sergeant sniper.
Colin, as we're looking at the picture, is on the left or the right?
Colin is on the, as we're looking at the picture, Colin is on the right.
He's on the right.
Okay, let's move on.
You're on the right there.
I'm on the right there, and that's, once again, Duane Miller, my buddy.
And in the middle is Mohammed Atta.
He was an engineer that worked for us there at the embassy.
He did all of our work.
anything that we needed.
He became a very close friend.
In fact, he's already come over from Iraq once to visit, and he's looking at in December of this year, he's going to come back over and visit with me again.
Okay, let's move on.
Real quickly, what are we looking at there?
This is the award ceremony on the last day I was in Iraq.
They were giving us all of our awards for our service during the 13 months.
Very good.
Next.
That was my getup for one specific sniper mission we went on.
They wanted us to blend into the local populace.
And that's the way you did it?
That's the way I did it.
There you go.
That works.
That's Moneer Ata.
I'm sorry, that's Qasim Ata.
He's got a twin brother named Moneer.
That's Qasim.
He was one of the Ata brothers.
He was also one of the engineers and became very close friends.
All right.
Next picture, your official photograph.
That's my official photograph.
That was taken in 2005.
Just before we went to Iraq, they had those photos made of us.
In case we didn't make it back, they had a good picture to have for our funerals.
Oh, my goodness.
You can look at it that way, certainly.
Okay.
What is that?
The statue behind me is a bust of Saddam Hussein.
Those were on every one of his palaces.
As you can tell, I'm 5'9", and you can tell how tall that thing is from how it looks against me.
But that one was inside the international zone, and it was a photo opportunity as soon as I saw it.
Okay, let's move on.
It's an interesting picture.
I have no idea what it is, but you gave it to me.
So what is that?
That's a picture of my room in the embassy.
The couch and the rug were there when I moved in.
Those belonged to some high-ranking official in Saddam's his regime.
And when I moved in there, I took it over.
The other thing sitting on this is my
That's my tactical shotgun sitting on the couch.
Picture of me having a buddy of mine, Greg Bremseth, and I having dinner with the Atta family.
These are the ones that weren't ever in the green zone.
They didn't get to meet American soldiers.
So as soon as they got the chance, they wanted photo opportunities.
We ate dinner with them on a regular basis.
Some interesting food.
Very good.
Interesting photographs.
May the 14th is a significant day in your life.
Your son was born on that day in 1991.
That makes it a happy day.
In 2006 makes it a very sad day for you.
Talk about what happened that day.
May the 14th at about 1.30 in the afternoon, I was with my roving band of snipers, as everybody like to call us, and we got hit by an IED, and there were four other people in the vehicle, and one of my gunner had been in the hatch for a long time that day, and I told him,
Look, you've been in there long enough today, Danny.
Let me jump in the hatch and give you a break, let you get down and get some air conditioning.
After a little bit of arguing and stuff, he finally decided he was going to come down and get some air conditioning.
About five minutes later, we hit an IED and I was the only survivor.
I was lucky I didn't, I was breaking all the rules.
I didn't have my gunner's harness on.
I didn't have the
anything else on it because I knew we were just right outside of the compound.
We weren't going to be alone.
And I was blown out of the vehicle and everybody else was killed.
You lost four of your soldiers that day on, on May the 14th.
And that leads us to, we've got about four minutes left here.
Um, you were diagnosed a disability besides physical pain, back and ankle pain.
Uh, you were also diagnosed with a medium to extreme, uh, PTSD, post-traumatic stress.
a disorder.
Talk about that, how it's affected your life, but the main message that you want to send is to others who are in Iraq right now are coming back.
The stage is yours.
Talk about that.
Okay.
PTSD is nothing to be ashamed of.
At first when I got back, I was ashamed of it.
I said that I thought it was a sign of weakness.
There's no way this can happen to me.
This happened to Vietnam vets.
They were the ones that had it bad.
The message that I want to put out to soldiers and to veterans is that if you have PTSD, or if you have an inkling that you have PTSD, go get seen immediately.
You can't solve it by yourself.
It's the silent killer of veterans.
I don't know what else to tell people.
It's just get help.
It helps you.
It helps your family.
So like the message you're trying to say is exactly like you.
You thought it was something to be ashamed of, that you didn't want to confront the denial stage and everything that you go through on that.
And what you're wanting to tell young men that have come back
that have gone through a traumatic experience like you did on May 14, 2006, or any type of experience that you're having trouble sleeping, whatever, don't be afraid to go get help.
There are facilities and there are people especially for that.
Right.
You can go over on Rock Prairie Road, right here in College Station.
You can go over there.
I don't have it with me.
I wish I did.
There's an 800 number that you can call.
And it's the Veterans Administration suicide assistance hotline.
Right.
They will talk to you if you're thinking of doing anything harmful to yourself or if you're just feeling down, they'll talk to you.
But just one thing is get help, please.
Get help.
That's what it's for.
2006, you went back to Fort Hood.
you decided at that time to retire.
They gave you the opportunity to re-up for some more, but you decided at that time it was time for your family, right?
20 years you'd put in.
20 years and 27 days.
Well, at the time it had been 19 years and they offered me a promotion and I turned it down.
I was like, the time has come for me to spend with my family.
I've drug my wife and my son around this, all over this country and all over this world for the last
going on well for 18 years that we'd been married at the time and for 17 years of my son's life and i decided it was time that we hang up the hat and become a civilian it was a good decision after 20 years and it's uh and i know you're very involved with the veterans of foreign wars here and uh and we appreciate your service but we're out of time and thank you for your story and for your service thank you very much thank you keith
In 2008, Keith Youngblood was offered a promotion and another tour of Iraq, but he rightly decided that it was family time, a time well earned in two decades of service to his country.
His courage extends beyond those times that he was in harm's way to today as he shares his own inner battles so that his story might help others.
For that and his exquisite service, we salute Sergeant Keith Youngblood.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.